Case Summaries

Hargraves v. Capitol City Mortgage Corp. (D.D.C.)
In this lawsuit against Capital City Mortgage Corp. and its president and Thomas Nash, private plaintiffs contend that the company targeted minorities for loans that were designed to fail, due to unfair payment terms and income levels of the borrowers that would not sustain the loan payments. In their complaint, the plaintiffs claim that Capital City's lending practices violated several federal laws, including the Fair Housing and the Equal Credit Opportunity Acts by engaging in a pattern or practice of targeting African American communities, a practice known as "reverse redlining," for abusive or predatory lending practices. The defendants filed a motion for summary judgment on the grounds that reverse redlining does not violate either law because they have provided credit to African Americans, and on the same terms that they would provide to whites. The United States filed an amicus brief, which supported the view that lending practices designed to induce minorities into loans destined to fail could violate the fair lending laws. 
Our brief argues that by targeting minorities for predatory loans, a lender discriminates in the terms and conditions of home financing, even if it makes all or most of its loans in minority areas. The fact that a lender does business only in minority neighborhoods does not shield its business from scrutiny under federal fair lending laws. In addition, racially targeted loans that are designed to fail make housing unavailable because of race since the borrowers are likely to lose their homes through foreclosure.
The Federal Trade Commission has filed a separate action charging the same defendants with violating a number of federal consumer protection laws. FTC v. Capital City Mortgage Corp., No. 98-237 (JHG/AK) (D.D.C. filed Jan. 29, 1998). Both matters are still pending.
Gomez v. Quicken Loans (C.D. Cal.)
On April 1, 2013, the Division filed a statement of interest in Gomez v. Quicken Loans (C.D. Cal.), a case alleging that Quicken Loans discriminated against borrowers with disabilities by requiring that they provide a letter from a doctor as a condition of their loans. The Statement of Interest states that (1) Smith v. City of Jackson did not overrule, explicitly or implicitly, decades of FHA disparate impact precedent, (2) disparate treatment claims do not require proof of ill intent, and (3) Equal Credit Opportunity Act claims do not require a denial of credit.
United States v. AIG Federal Savings Bank and Wilmington Finance, Inc. (D. Del.) 
On March 4, 2010, the United States filed a fair lending complaint and consent order resolving United States v. AIG Federal Savings Bank and Wilmington Finance, Inc. (D. Del.). AIG Federal Savings Bank (FSB) and Wilmington Finance Inc. (WFI), two subsidiaries of American International Group, Inc., have agreed to pay a minimum of $6.1 million to resolve allegations that they engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination against African American borrowers. The complaint alleges that the two violated the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act when they charged higher fees on wholesale loans to African American borrowers nationwide on thousands of loans from July 2003 until May 2006, a period of time before the federal government obtained an ownership interest in American International Group Inc. The complaint further alleges that AIG FSB and WFI contracted with mortgage brokers to obtain mortgage applications that were underwritten and funded by the defendants and failed to supervise or monitor brokers in setting broker fees. Under the settlement, AIG FSB and WFI will pay up to $6.1 million to African American customers who were charged higher broker fees than non-Hispanic white customers and will invest at least $1 million in consumer financial education efforts and shall also be prohibited from discriminating on the basis of race or color in any aspect of wholesale home mortgage lending. This case resulted from a referral by the Treasury Department’s Office of Thrift Supervision to the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division. The court entered the consent order on March 22, 2010.
United States v. Albank (N.D.N.Y.)
In this case, the United States claimed that the bank refused to take mortgage loan applications from areas in Connecticut and Westchester County, New York with significant minority populations. The bank could provide no reason for carving out areas with large concentrations of minority individuals from its lending areas. The United States resolved this matter on August 13, 1997, with a consent decree, which required the bank to provide $55 million in loans at below market rates to the areas that it refused to service previously and to implement a non-discriminatory lending policy.

On January 18, 2005, the court entered a consent decree in United States & Bitton v. Altmayer (N.D. Ill.). The United States' complaint, filed on March 2, 2005, alleged that Peter Altmayer intimidated and harassed his next door neighbors, and their two minor children, on the basis of their religion (Jewish) and national origins (Israeli and Mexican). The consent decree requires the defendant to pay $15,000 to the complainants, enjoins the defendant from discriminating based on religion or national origin, prohibits him from violating 42 §: 3617 with regard to the complainants, and requires him to attend fair housing training. The consent decree will remain in effect for five years. This case was handled primarily by the U.S. Attorney's Office. 
The case was referred to the Division after the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) received a complaint, conducted an investigation, and issued a charge of discrimination.
United States v. Associates National Bank (D. Del.)
On March 29, 1999, the United States filed a lawsuit against Associates National Bank of Delaware [ANB], a leading issuer of Visa and MasterCard bank cards, claiming that the bank violated the Equal Credit Opportunity Act [ECOA] by discriminating on the basis of national origin, specifically, against persons of Hispanic origin. Our complaint asserted that individuals applying for an ANB/UNOCAL MasterCard through the bank's Spanish-language application were processed through a separate approval system, which utilized a credit scoring system that required higher scores than those required for English-language applicants. As a consequence, some Spanish-language applicants were denied credit on a discriminatory basis. The United States also claimed that approved Spanish-language UNOCAL applicants were given lower credit line assignments than applicants processed through the English-language decision system. Finally, we contended that the bank offered different promotional credit services to those who applied through the Spanish-language system from those commonly offered to other customers. The United States estimate that as a result of ANB's actions, approximately 1,800 Hispanic applicants and customers who utilized ANB's Spanish-language applications were adversely affected. 
Under the settlement agreement ANB will establish a $1.5 million Compensation Fund to provide damages to hundreds of Hispanic applicants who faced stricter underwriting standards and less favorable credit terms and conditions than those who applied in English between late February 1996 and April 1997. Any funds remaining after all claims have been paid will be used for consumer education in Hispanic communities. This is the first fair lending case brought by the Department of Justice alleging discrimination in connection with credit cards. 
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency referred this matter to us.
United States v. Bank of America N.A. (W.D.N.C.)
On September 13, 2012, the United States filed a complaint and consent order in United States v. Bank of America, N.A. The complaint, based on a HUD election referral, alleges that Bank of America discriminated on the basis of disability and receipt of public assistance in underwriting and originating loans, by requiring loan applicants who receive Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) income to provide a letter from their doctor as part of the loan application. The consent order requires the Bank to maintain revised policies, conduct employee training and pay compensation to victims. Bank of America will pay $1,000, $2,500 or $5,000 to eligible mortgage loan applicants who were asked to provide a letter from their doctor to document the income they received from SSDI. Applicants who were asked to provide more detailed medical information to document their income may be paid more than those who were asked to have a doctor verify their source of income. In addition, the HUD complainants who initiated this suit received a total of $125,000. The consent order was entered on October 10, 2012. 
United States v. Bank United d/b/a/ Commonwealth United Mortgage (W.D.N.Y. 1999) 
The United States filed this case after a determination by the Department of Housing and Urban Development [HUD] that reasonable cause existed to believe that Bank United discriminated against a loan applicant and her children on the basis of disability. The complaint contended that the bank requested information from the applicant concerning the nature and severity of their disabilities when she sought a mortgage loan.
The bank agreed to resolve this matter without a trial and entered into a consent decree, which provided $25,000 in monetary compensation to the complaints, established procedures for processing mortgage applications where the applicant relies on disability income to qualify, and required bank employees to receive training on the Fair Housing Act.
United States v. Blackpipe State Bank (D. S.D.) 
The United States resolved claims, set forth in our complaint, that the bank charged Native Americans higher interest rates than other equally qualified applicants and refused to make loans when the collateral was located on reservations. In the consent decree, the bank agreed to expand its services to reservations, market its products to Native Americans, reduce interest rates and finance charges on existing discriminatory loans, and create a $125,000 fund for past rejected applicants.
United States v. Capital One, N.A. (E.D. Va.)
On December 21, 2012, the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia entered an amended consent order in United States v. Capital One, N.A. (E.D. Va.), settling a lawsuit which alleged the defendants violated the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (SCRA). The defendant has agreed to pay approximately $12 million to resolve the matter. The settlement covers a range of conduct that violated the protections guaranteed servicemembers by the SCRA, including wrongful foreclosures, improper repossessions of motor vehicles, wrongful court judgments, improper denials of the 6 percent interest rate the SCRA guarantees to servicemembers on some credit card and car loans, and insufficient 6 percent benefits granted on credit cards, car loans and other types of accounts. The agreement requires Capital One to pay approximately $7 million in damages to servicemembers for SCRA violations, including at least $125,000 in compensation plus compensation for any lost equity (with interest) to each servicemember whose home was unlawfully foreclosed upon, and at least $10,000 in compensation plus compensation for any lost equity (with interest) to each servicemember whose motor vehicle was unlawfully repossessed. In addition, the agreement requires Capital One to create a $5 million fund to compensate servicemembers who did not receive the appropriate amount of SCRA benefits on their credit card accounts, motor vehicle finance loans, and consumer loans. Any portion of the $5 million that remains after payments to servicemembers are made will be donated by Capital One to one or more charitable organizations that assist servicemembers. The consent order which was filed simultaneously with the complaint on July 26, 2012, is one of the most comprehensive SCRA settlements ever obtained by a government agency or any private party under the SCRA.
United States v. C&F Mortgage Corporation (E.D. Va.)
On September 30, 2011, the United States filed a complaint and consent order in United States v. C&F Mortgage Corporation (E.D. Va.), a pattern or practice case under the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act that was referred by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The complaint alleges that C&F charged greater interest rate markups (overages) and gave lesser discounts (underages) on home mortgage loans made to African-American and Hispanic borrowers by giving its employees wide discretion in overages and underages without having in place objective criteria for setting the overages and underages. The complaint alleges that this policy had a disparate impact on African-American and Hispanic borrowers. The consent order resolves the case by requiring C&F to develop uniform policies for all aspects of its loan pricing and to phase out the practice of charging overages to home mortgage borrowers. The settlement also requires the bank to pay $140,000 to black and Hispanic victims of discrimination, monitor its loans for potential disparities based on race or national origin, and provide equal credit opportunity training to its employees. The court entered the consent order October 4, 2011.
United States v. Centier Bank (N.D. Ind.)
On October 13, 2006, the United States filed a complaint and consent order in United States v. Centier Bank (N.D. Ind.), an Equal Credit Opportunity Act/Fair Housing Act case which alleges discrimination on the basis of race and national origin. The Bank is one of the largest residential and small business lenders in the Gary, Indiana, metropolitan area, one of the most racially segregated areas of the country. The complaint alleges Centier Bank has engaged avoided serving the lending and credit needs of majority minority neighborhoods, most of which are located in the cities of Gary, East Chicago, and Hammond. 
The consent order requires the Bank to: invest a minimum of $3.5 million in special financing program for residential and CRA small business loans; commit at least $375,000 in targeted advertising; invest $500,000 to provide credit counseling, financial literacy, business planning, and other related educational programs targeted at the residents and small businesses of African-American and Hispanic areas and sponsor programs offered by community or governmental organizations engaged in fair lending work; open or acquire at least two full service offices within designated African - American neighborhoods; expand an existing supermarket branch in a majority Hispanic neighborhood to provide full lending services; provide the same services offered at its majority white suburban locations to all branches regardless of their location; train employees on the requirements of the Fair Housing Act and Equal Credit Opportunity Act; and require record-keeping and reports to United States as well as other remedial relief. The consent decree will remain in effect for five years.
United States v. Chevy Chase Bank (D.D.C.) 
In our complaint we alleged that the bank refused to market loans in predominantly African American neighborhoods because of the racial identity of those neighborhoods. Under the agreement we reached with the bank, it agreed to pay $11 million to the neglected areas through a special loan program and through efforts to service those neighborhoods.
United States v. Citizens Republic Bancorp, Inc. and Citizens Bank (E.D. Mich.)
On May 5, 2011, the United States filed a complaint in United States v. Citizens Republic Bancorp, Inc. and Citizens Bank (E.D. Mich.), a Fair Housing Act and Equal Credit Opportunity Act pattern or practice case that was referred by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The complaint alleged that Citizens Republic Bancorp, Inc. (CRBC), as the successor to Republic Bank, and Citizens Bank failed to provide their home mortgage lending services to the residents of majority African-American neighborhoods on an equal basis as those services are provided to residents of predominantly white neighborhoods in the Detroit metropolitan area, a practice commonly known as "redlining." On May 24, the court declined to enter a proposed consent order, and on June 23, 2011, the United States and defendants filed a stipulated notice of dismissal based on the settlement agreement reached by the parties and attached to that notice. On June 28, 2011, the court dismissed the case. Under the settlement agreement, defendants will open a loan production office in an African-American neighborhood in the City of Detroit and hire two community lenders; and invest in the formerly redlined majority African-American areas of Wayne County by providing $1.5 million in a special financing program to increase the amount of credit the bank extends in those areas, by partnering with the City of Detroit to provide $1.625 million in matching grants of up to $5,000 to existing homeowners for exterior improvements, and by conducting $500,000 in advertising, marketing, and consumer financial education targeted to those areas.
United States v. Community State Bank (E.D. Mich.)
On January 15, 2013, the United states filed a complaint and consent order in United States v. Community State Bank (E.D. Mich.). The complaint, which grew out of a referral from the FDIC, alleges that from 2006 to 2009, Community redlined majority-African-American census tracts in the Saginaw and Flint, Michigan metropolitan areas, including substantial portions of the City of Saginaw. Community is an eight-branch bank that is one of the five largest banks in Saginaw County, but has never operated a branch in the City of Saginaw and made only one loan in Saginaw's majority-African American census tracts during the four-year period. The consent order requires Community to open a loan production office in a majority-African-American neighborhood of the City of Saginaw and to fund a $75,000 loan subsidy program, a $75,000 community development partnership program, and a $15,000 advertising program to encourage and increase lending in the redlined tracts. The court entered the consent order on March 12, 2013.
United States v. Compass Bank (N.D. Ala.)
On February 21, 2007, the court entered the consent order in United States v. Compass Bank (N.D. Ala.), resolving claims that Compass Bank violated the Equal Credit Opportunity Act by engaging in a pattern of discrimination on the basis of marital status in thousands of automobile loans that it made through hundreds of different car dealerships in the South and Southwest between May 2001 and May 2003. Specifically, the complaint, filed on January 12, 2007, alleged that the bank charged non-spousal co-applicants higher interest rates than similarly-situated married co-applicants. This case resulted from a referral by the Federal Reserve Board. To remedy the alleged discrimination, Compass Bank will pay up to $1.75 million to compensate several thousand non-spousal co-applicants whom the United States alleges were charged higher rates as a result of their marital status.
United States v. Countrywide Financial Corporation, et al. (C.D. Cal.)
On December 28, 2011, the court entered a consent order in United States v. Countrywide Financial Corporation, et al. (C.D. Cal.). The complaint and proposed consent order, filed on December 21, 2011 against Countrywide Financial Corporation and its subsidiaries Countrywide Home Loans and Countrywide Bank, alleged that between 2004 and 2008, Countrywide engaged in a nationwide pattern or practice of discrimination in its residential lending activities in violation of both the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. The alleged violations by Countrywide include: (a) discrimination against African-American and Hispanic borrowers in the pricing of retail home loans; (b) discrimination against African-American and Hispanic borrowers in the pricing of wholesale home loans; (c) discrimination against African-American and Hispanic wholesale borrowers by placing them in subprime loan products when it placed white wholesale borrowers with similar credit qualifications in prime loan products; and (d) discrimination on the basis of marital status by following policies and practices that encouraged the non-applicant spouse of a married borrower applying for credit in his/her own name to execute documents transferring his/her rights in the property securing the loan to the applicant spouse. The consent order includes the establishment of a $335 million Settlement Fund to compensate victims of Countrywide's discrimination, which is being administered by an independent Administrator, Rust Consulting, Inc., and injunctive relief to prevent the recurrence of the alleged unlawful lending practices in the event Countrywide re-enters the residential mortgage lending business.
United States v. Decatur Federal Savings & Loan (N.D. Ga.)
This was the United States first mortgage lending action. In the complaint, filed on September 17, 1992, the Division alleged that the bank applied stricter underwriting standards to African American applicants than to white applicants. The United States also contended that the bank devised ways to avoid dealing with African Americans. Under the agreement we reached with the bank, it agreed to pay $1 million to compensate 48 victims of discrimination and to take a series of corrective measures to ensure compliance with federal fair lending laws.
United States v. Delta Funding Corporation (E.D.N.Y.)
The Civil Rights Division, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the Federal Trade Commission claimed that Delta Funding Corporation violated both fair lending and consumer protection laws. This lawsuit marks the first such combined action by the federal agencies. Delta is engaged in subprime mortgage lending and obtains most of its loans through mortgage brokers. Although the company operates in more than a third of the states, its business is concentrated in Brooklyn and Queens, New York, primarily in minority residential areas. In the complaint, filed on March 31, 2000, we claimed that the company violated the Fair Housing and Equal Credit Opportunity Acts by granting loans with higher broker fees to African American females than those for white males, the Real Estate Settlement Practices Act by allowing unreasonable broker fees, and the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act by engaging in asset-based lending. 
The United States were able to resolve the suit with a settlement agreement, which applies to the company's operations nationwide. The agreement requires Delta, among other things, to refuse to fund loans with discriminatory or unearned broker fees and to insure that loans are not made to persons who cannot afford the payments. Monetary relief of up to $12 million will be paid to victims under a previous agreement between Delta, the New York State Banking Department, and the New York State Attorney General.

United States v. Deposit Guaranty National Bank (N.D. Miss.)
In this case, the United States claimed that the bank had discriminated on the basis of race against African-American loan applicants in Mississippi, Arkansas, and Louisiana through the use of subjective underwriting practices. The complaint noted that those African American applicants for home improvement loans whose applications were "credit scored" were at least three times as likely to be rejected than similarly-situated white applicants.
Under the terms of the settlement, an estimated 250 African-American applicants, whose applications for home improvement loans were evaluated under the flawed underwriting system, will share in a $3 million fund. In addition, loan applications will be underwritten under a uniform and centralized underwriting policies and procedures, all applications initially recommended for rejection will receive a second level of review by senior underwriting officials, decisions to override the result indicated by a credit score can only be made by a small number of bank officials, and there will be frequent reviews and analyses of all underwriting decisions in order to ensure their consistency with fair lending requirements. 
The Office of the Comptroller referred this matter to us in January 1999.
United States v. Fidelity Federal Bank (E.D.N.Y.) 
On July 8, 2002, the United States filed a complaint and a settlement agreement against Fidelity Federal Bank, FSB (" Fidelity ") of Glendale, California alleging a pattern or practice of discrimination in its subprime credit programs in violation of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (" ECOA "). The complaint alleges that Fidelity discriminated based on national origin by engaging in abusive collection practices in its credit card program which harassed customers on the basis on their Hispanic national origin. It further alleges that Fidelity, through its relationship with these third parties, failed to issue credit cards in compliance with the ECOA. 
Under the terms of the Settlement Agreement and Order, Fidelity agreed to pay $1.6 million dollars to compensate the victims of these violations and to fund a Consumer Education Program. Fidelity will implement a comprehensive Compliance and Risk Management Program and will provide fair lending training for all employees engaged in credit card program activities. Fidelity will provide the Division with records of their credit card applications and originations for a three year period. 
United States v. First American Bank (N.D. Ill.)
On July 19, 2004, the court entered a consent order resolving a pattern or practice lawsuit alleging that First American Bank violated the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Opportunity Act by unlawfully failing to market and provide its lending products and services to predominantly minority neighborhoods in the Chicago and Kankakee metropolitan areas, a practice commonly known as redlining. Under the terms of the consent order, First American Bank will: open four new full-service branch offices, three located in majority African-American census tracts in the Chicago area and one in a majority Hispanic census tract; invest $5 million in a special financing program for residents and small businesses in the minority communities of the Chicago/Kankakee areas; invest at least $300,000 for consumer education programs; and spend at least $400,000 to advertise its products in media targeted to minority communities.
The Division's complaint, also filed on July 13, 2004, alleged that none of First American's 34 branches are located in a minority area, and that First American defined its Community Reinvestment Act service area over time to exclude most majority-minority areas. The complaint also alleges that in 1999-2000, First American Bank made only 3.8% of its home equity loans; 2.4% of its auto loans; and 4.7% of its small business loans in minority census tracts. The complaint further alleged that of the nearly $288 million in single family residential real-estate related loans funded by the Bank between 1999 and 2001, only 4.5% went to properties located in minority census tracts. Additionally, the complaint alleged that First American officials made statements to explain the Bank's business practices which were based on racial and ethnic stereotypes.
The matter was referred to the Division by the Federal Reserve Board, and the investigation was jointly conducted by the Division and the United States Attorney's office for the Northern District of Illinois. 
United States v. First Lowndes Bank (M.D. Ala.)
On September 29, 2008, the United States filed a complaint and consent order in United States v. First Lowndes Bank (M.D. Ala.). The complaint alleged that the bank engaged in a pattern or practice of discriminating against African-American customers by charging them higher interest rates on manufactured housing loans than similarly situated white customers, in violation of the Fair Housing Act (FHA) and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA). Under the consent order, First Lowndes Bank will pay up to $185,000, plus interest, to compensate African-American borrowers who were charged higher interest rates. The consent order also enjoins the bank from discriminating against customers on the basis of race in its home mortgage lending. In addition, the bank has agreed to implement new procedures to prevent discrimination in setting interest rates and will provide enhanced equal credit opportunity training to its officers and employees who set rates for housing loans. 
United States v. First National Bank of Doña Ana County (D. N.M.) 
In the complaint the United States contended that the bank unfairly denied loans to Hispanics trying to purchase mobile homes by applying stricter underwriting standards to Hispanic applicants than those applied to similarly situated Anglo applicants. This was the Department's first case involving mobile home loans. Under the settlement, the bank agreed to pay $485,000 in damages, provide another $100,000 for a subsidized mobile home loan fund, and conduct a program of community outreach to inform the public of the lender's mortgage programs.
United States v. First National Bank of Gordon (D. S.D.) 
This complaint, filed on April 15, 1996, concerned allegations that the bank unfairly charged higher interest rates to American Indians for consumer loans. Pursuant to the consent order, filed on May 7, 1997, the bank paid $275,000 to compensate victims of the illegal discrimination. In addition, the bank agreed to establish a program to help educate residents of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation on how to establish and manage credit with the bank. 
United States v. First National Bank of Vicksburg (S.D. Miss.) 
In this complaint, filed on January 21, 1994, the United States claimed that the bank charged African Americans higher interest rates on unsecured home improvement loans than equally qualified non-minorities. Under the consent decree, the bank agreed to pay approximately $750,000 to compensate victims, pay $50,000 in civil penalties, and take a variety of corrective measures.
United States v. First United Security Bank (S.D. Ala.)
On September 30, 2009, the United States filed a complaint and Agreed Order for Resolution in United States v. First United Security Bank (S.D. Ala.), alleging discriminatory pricing and redlining in violation of the Fair Housing Act and Equal Credit Opportunity Act. On November 18, 2009, the court entered the Agreed Order for Resolution. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) initially referred this matter to the Department of Justice based on its finding of pricing discrimination in home mortgage lending, and the Division investigated and added redlining claims regarding both the bank's home mortgage lending and its small business lending services. Under the settlement, First United will open one new branch and expand existing operations in majority African-American areas of west central Alabama. The bank will also invest $500,000 in a special financing program, and spend more than $110,000 for outreach to potential customers, promotion of its products and services and consumer financial education in these areas. 
United States v. Fleet Mortgage Company (E.D.N.Y.)
On May 6, 1996, the United States filed a complaint against Fleet Mortgage Company claimed that the company charged African American and Hispanic borrowers higher prices for home mortgage loans than whites. Under the agreement, which was filed along with the complaint and entered on June 7, 1996, the company agreed to pay damages of $3,800,000 to 599 victims of discrimination and to contribute $200,000 to a fair lending outreach campaign.
United States v. GFI Mortgage Bankers, Inc. (S.D.N.Y.)
On August 27, 2012, the court entered a consent order in United States v. GFI Mortgage Bankers, Inc. (S.D.N.Y.). The complaint, filed on April 2, 2012, alleged that GFI Mortgage Bankers, Inc. ("GFI") violated the Fair Housing Act and Equal Credit Opportunity Act by discriminating against African-American and Hispanic borrowers in the pricing of home-mortgage loans. Specifically, the United States alleges that from 2005 through at least 2009, GFI charged African-American and Hispanic borrowers significantly higher interest rates and fees than it charged to similarly-situated white borrowers for home loans, resulting in thousands of dollars in overcharges to minority borrowers because of race or national origin. The consent order requires the defendant to pay $3.5 million in compensation to approximately 600 African-American and Hispanic GFI borrowers identified by the United States as paying more for a loan based on their race or national origin, and it requires GFI to pay the maximum $55,000 civil penalty allowed by the Fair Housing Act. The settlement also requires GFI to develop and implement new policies that limit the pricing discretion of its loan officers, require documentation of loan pricing decisions, and monitor loan prices for race and national origin disparities not justified by objective borrower credit characteristics or loan features. As part of the settlement, GFI admits that an analysis of the note interest rates and fees that it charged on mortgage loans to qualified borrowers showed statistically significant disparities between non-Hispanic white borrowers and both African-American and Hispanic borrowers that could not be explained by objective borrower characteristics or loan product features. The company also admitted that it provided financial incentives to its loan officers to charge higher interest rates and fees to borrowers and that it did not have fair lending training and monitoring programs in place to prevent those interest rate and fee disparities from occurring. The settlement came after the United States had filed its opposition to GFI's motion to dismiss the case and the court had stated it was "skeptical" of GFI's argument that federal law allows lenders to price loans in a way that produces such disparate impacts on minority borrowers. 



United States v. Huntington Mortgage Company (N.D. Ohio) 
In our complaint we claimed that the bank charged African Americans higher up-front fees on home mortgages, known as overages. Under the agreement that we signed on October 18, 1995, with Huntington, the company agreed to create a $420,000 fund to compensate victims and change its policies to ensure uniform pricing.
United States v. Long Beach Mortgage Company (C.D. Cal.) 
In this instance, the bank allowed its employee loan officers and independent loan brokers to charge, at their discretion, an additional amount over its base price for the loan. Our complaint, filed on September 5, 1996, alleged a pattern of African American, Hispanic, female, and older borrowers paying a greater amount for their loans than other borrowers. Under the settlement agreement, also filed on September 5th, the company paid $3 million in damages to 1,200 victims of discrimination.
United States v. Luther Burbank Savings (C.D. Cal.)
On September 12, 2012, the United States filed a complaint and consent order in United States v. Luther Burbank Savings (C.D. Cal.). The complaint alleges that from 2006 to 2011, Luther engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination in its residential lending activities in violation of the Fair Housing Act and Equal Credit Opportunity Act. During that time period, Luther enforced a $400,000 minimum loan amount policy for its wholesale single-family residential mortgage loan program. The United States alleges that this policy or practice had a disparate impact on the basis of race and national origin. Under the settlement Luther will invest $1.1 million in a special financing program to increase the residential mortgage credit that the bank extends to qualified borrowers in the affected areas seeking loans of $400,000 or less in California. The bank also will invest $450,000 in partnerships with community-based organizations that provide credit and financial services to minorities in the affected areas; spend $300,000 for outreach to potential customers and promotion of its products and services; spend $150,000 on consumer education programs; and conduct fair lending training for employees. Luther also is prohibited from establishing or implementing a loan amount policy similar to the prior $400,000 minimum loan amount policy. The court entered the consent order on October 15, 2012.
United States v. Mid America Bank, fsb (N.D. Ill.) 
On December 30, 2002, the United States submitted a consent order to the U.S. District Court in Chicago, resolving a lawsuit alleging that Mid America Bank, fsb violated the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act by unlawfully failing to market and provide its lending products and services to predominantly African American and Hispanic neighborhoods, a practice commonly known as redlining. Mid America, a federally chartered savings and loan association, is the largest independent thrift institution in the Chicago metropolitan area and the second largest such institution in Illinois. Under the settlement, Mid America will open two new branch offices in the allegedly redlined areas and invest $10 million over five years in a special financing program, under which it will offer residents of the redlined areas home mortgages and other residential real estate-related loan products on more favorable terms than would normally be provided. 
The Division's complaint, filed on December 30, 2002, alleged that the 34-branch Mid America has never opened a full-service branch office in a census tract with a majority African American or majority African American/Hispanic population, despite opening or acquiring 20 new branch offices between 1994 and early 2002. The complaint also alleges that the Bank made nearly $6 billion in single-family residential real-estate loans between 1996 and 2000, but that only 1% of that amount went to census tracts with majority African American populations and only 2.75% to majority African American, African American/Hispanic, and Hispanic census tracts combined. The complaint further alleges that Mid America, until December 2001, defined its service area in an unusually restrictive way that excluded most minority neighborhoods. Additionally, the complaint alleges that although Mid America solicited and funded a large number of loans outside its defined service area, those loans also were made primarily to residents of predominantly white census tracts.
United States v. Midwest BankCentre (E.D. Mo.)
On June 16, 2011, the United States filed a complaint and agreed order in United States v. Midwest BankCentre (E.D. Mo.), a Fair Housing Act and Equal Credit Opportunity Act pattern or practice case. The matter was referred to us by the Metropolitan St. Louis Equal Housing Opportunities Council in 2009 and was the subject of a referral from the Federal Reserve Board in 2010. The complaint alleges that Midwest BankCentre (Midwest) failed to provide its home mortgage lending services to residents of majority African American neighborhoods on an equal basis as it provided those services to residents of predominantly white neighborhoods in the Missouri portion of the St. Louis metropolitan area, a practice commonly known as "redlining." Under the agreed order Midwest will open a full-service branch in an African-American neighborhood and invest in the formerly redlined majority African-American areas in the Missouri portion of the St. Louis metropolitan area by providing $900,000 in a special financing program to increase the amount of credit the bank extends in those areas; spending $300,000 for consumer education and credit repair programs, and spending $250,000 for outreach to potential customers and promotion of their products and services. The court entered the amended agreed order on April 15, 2012.
United States v. The Mortgage Super Center (D. Ariz.)
On November 7, 2005, the court entered a consent decree resolving United States v. The Mortgage Super Center (D. Ariz.). The complaint, filed on December 23, 2004 alleged that the defendants, the Mortgage Center and Nogales Realty, breached a conciliation agreement they had entered into with the Department of Housing and Urban Development to resolve a complaint that the defendants had discriminated on the basis of national origin. The complaint alleged that in the Conciliation Agreement, the defendants agreed to pay $1000 to the complainants and to refinance the complainants' first and second mortgages as one loan and that they failed to do so. The consent decree enjoins the defendants from discriminating on the basis of national origin, requires fair housing training, and requires the defendants to pay the complainants $8,358.85. The consent decree will remain in effect for three years.
United States v. Nixon State Bank (W.D. Tex.)
On June 17, 2011, the United States filed a complaint and consent order in United States v. Nixon State Bank (W.D. Tex.), an Equal Credit Opportunity Act pattern or practice that was referred by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The complaint alleges that Nixon charged higher prices on unsecured consumer loans made to Hispanic borrowers through the bank’s branch offices. The consent order resolves the case by requiring Nixon to further revise its uniform rate matrices to price unsecured consumer and other loans offered by the bank to ensure that the price charged for its loans is set in a non-discriminatory manner. The settlement also requires the bank to pay nearly $100,000 to Hispanic victims of discrimination, monitor its loans for potential disparities based on national origin, and provide equal credit opportunity training to its employees. The agreement also prohibits the bank from discriminating on the basis of national origin in any aspect of a credit transaction. The court entered the consent order on June 21, 2011.
United States v. Northern Trust Company (N.D. Ill.) 
In this case, our complaint, filed on June 1, 1995, contended that the bank failed to make the same efforts to approve African American and Hispanic mortgage loan applicants as it did for white applicants, and it made special efforts to qualify white applicants while it did not make similar efforts for minority applicants. Under the consent decree, also filed on June 1, 1995, the bank agreed to create a $700,000 fund to compensate victims and take a number of other corrective measures.
United States v. Old Kent Financial Corporation and Old Kent Bank (E.D. Mich.) 
The May 19, 2004, the United States simultaneously filed and a complaint and settlement agreement in United States v. Old Kent Financial Corporation and Old Kent Bank (E.D. Mich.), a Fair Housing Act and Equal Credit Opportunity Act case. The complaint alleges that Old Kent Financial Corporation and Old Kent Bank of Detroit, subsequently acquired by Fifth Third and Fifth Third Bank (Michigan), unlawfully avoided making business and residential loans in predominantly African-American neighborhoods, a practice commonly referred to as redlining. The complaint alleges that Old Kent intentionally refused to issue loans and open branches in Detroit because of the city’s African-American population. Specifically, the complaint alleges that while Old Kent served largely white suburbs, it opened a branch in Detroit only after the Justice Department opened its investigation. The complaint also alleges that of the 15,473 small business and residential real estate related loans Old Kent made between 1996 and 2000 in the Detroit metropolitan area, only 335, or 2.2%, were made in majority African-American neighborhoods. The complaint further alleges that while capturing most of the greater Detroit area, Old Kent defined its Community Reinvestment Act service-area to exclude certain majority African-American areas. The enforceable settlement agreement requires the defendants to provide three million dollars for a loan subsidy program to provide Detroit businesses and residents small business loans and residential real estate-related loan products on favorable terms; open three new full-service branches in Detroit; advertise its products so as to generate loan applications from qualified businesses and residents in Detroit; invest $200,000 to develop and implement consumer education programs for residents and small businesses in Detroit; and, relocate its team of business banking lenders responsible for developing business in Detroit, the "Detroit Business Group Team," to the city of Detroit by the end of 2004. 
United States v. PrimeLending (N.D. Tex.)
On December 9, 2010, the United States filed a fair lending complaint and proposed consent order resolving United States v. PrimeLending (N.D. Tex.), alleging that the defendant engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination against African American borrowers nationwide between 2006 and 2009. The court entered the consent order on January 11, 2011. The defendant, a national mortgage lender with 168 offices in 32 states became one of the nation’s 20 largest FHA lenders by 2009. PrimeLending did not have monitoring in place to ensure that it complied with the fair lending laws, even as it grew to originate more than $5.5 billion in loans per year. The consent order requires the defendants to pay $2.0 million to the victims of discrimination and to have in place loan pricing policies, monitoring and employee training that ensure discrimination does not occur in the future. The complaint alleges that the defendant violated the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act when it charged African-American borrowers higher annual percentage rates of interest between 2006 and 2009 for prime fixed-rate home loans and for home loans guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration and Department of Veterans Affairs than it charged to similarly-situated white borrowers. PrimeLending’s policy of giving its employees wide discretion to increase their commissions by adding "overages" to loans, which increased the interest rates paid by borrowers, had a disparate impact on African-American borrowers. This case resulted from a referral by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve to the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division in 2009.
United States v. Security State Bank (W.D. Tex.) 
This complaint, filed on September 18, 1995, challenged the bank's alleged practice of charging Hispanics higher interest rates on consumer loans than non-Hispanic applicants. Under the agreement, filed simultaneously with the complaint, the bank agreed to create a $500,000 fund to compensate victims, pay $10,000 in civil penalties, and take a series of corrective measures.
United States v. Shawmut Mortgage Company (D. Conn.) 
On December 13, 1993, the bank resolved allegations that it refused to make loans to qualified African American and Hispanic applicants with an agreement to create a $960,000 fund to compensate victims.
United States v. Texas Champion Bank (S.D. Tex.)
On February 19, 2013, the United States filed a complaint and consent decree in United States v. Texas Champion Bank (S.D. Tex.), an Equal Credit Opportunity Act pattern or practice that was referred by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The complaint alleges that from 2006 to 2010, Texas Champion charged higher prices on unsecured consumer loans made to Hispanic borrowers than to similarly-situated non-Hispanic white borrowers through the bank's branch offices. The consent decree requires Texas Champion to further revise its uniform rate matrices used to price unsecured consumer and other loans offered by the bank, in order to ensure that the price charged for its loans is set in a non-discriminatory manner. The settlement also requires the bank to pay $700,000 to Hispanic victims of discrimination, monitor its loans for potential disparities based on national origin, and provide equal credit opportunity training to its employees. The agreement also prohibits the bank from discriminating on the basis of national origin in any aspect of a credit transaction. The court entered the consent decree on March 5, 2013.
United States v. Wells Fargo Bank, NA (D.D.C.)
On December 19, 2012, the Division notified the court in United States v. Wells Fargo Bank (D.D.C.) that the bank will provide $59.3 million in compensation to African-American and Hispanic retail subprime borrowers. Under the consent order, entered on September 21, 2012, Wells Fargo agreed to undertake an internal review to determine whether there were African-American and/or Hispanic borrowers who received subprime Wells Fargo loans from the bank's retail channel who might have qualified for prime loans from the retail channel. The consent order provided that any borrowers identified pursuant to the review would be compensated in an amount commensurate with the amounts paid to borrowers who received subprime loans from the bank's wholesale division. As a result of its review, Wells Fargo identified nearly 4,000 retail subprime borrowers who are eligible for compensation. With the additional compensation to retail subprime borrowers, the Division's settlement with Wells Fargo totals $234.3 million. The complaint, filed on July 12, 2012, alleged that Wells Fargo engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination against qualified African-American and Hispanic borrowers in its mortgage lending from 2004 through 2009. The complaint alleged that Wells Fargo discriminated by steering approximately 4,000 African-American and Hispanic wholesale borrowers, as well as additional retail borrowers, into subprime mortgages when non-Hispanic white borrowers with similar credit profiles received prime loans. All the borrowers who were allegedly discriminated against were qualified for Wells Fargo mortgage loans according to Well Fargo's own underwriting criteria. The United States also alleged that, between 2004 and 2009, Wells Fargo discriminated by charging approximately 30,000 African-American and Hispanic wholesale borrowers higher fees and rates than non-Hispanic white borrowers because of their race or national origin rather than the borrowers' credit worthiness or other objective criteria related to borrower risk. The consent order provided $125 million in compensation for wholesale borrowers who were allegedly steered into subprime mortgages or who allegedly paid higher fees and rates than white borrowers because of their race or national origin. Wells Fargo was also required to pay $50 million in direct down payment assistance to borrowers in communities around the country where the Department identified large numbers of discrimination victims and which were hard hit by the housing crisis. 




